Just getting over the big cold.
And that go, Sam, annoying about three weeks.
Three weeks drying Out. Third
week. Um, sucks,
Doesn't it, John Blackwell, We,
I hope you've done some farming this morning.
Mr. Blackwell. You, your,
your mic's on mute, John.
Oh, brilliant mate. Good to see you as always.
I was gonna say, you look pretty rugged up
for a guy that's apparently a farmer
Meet the candidates meeting's been going flat out
so, uh, yeah.
Uh, been bought late night.
It's gonna be another one tonight.
Oh, good stuff. Yeah. Miles. You miles.
Good day, John. How you going, mate?
Oh, yeah, yeah. Good. I think we're on feed together.
Yeah. Yeah. Hey, uh, did you find your, um, oh,
hear you found someone, mark?
Yes. Farm dairy
Far? Yeah. O on on
it goes, even the fiasco of trying to find
suitable stuff for a thousand cows.
But anyway, um, who, who would muck around with a big farm?
The little farm was, yeah.
Ironically, one of those ones where you want,
you wanna be rid of it as soon as you've got off it,
you want to go back Anyway, we got, oh, Jeffrey,
how are you hiding?
Hiding away. Good morning, client, sir.
And all the team, um, the,
the time is yours, everyone.
Um, and we, uh, are, are well aware of the, uh,
acute concerns in around Madagascar rag what?
And I think, um, you can give us a fair amount of
what you think, uh, is the way to move forward
with this very difficult situation.
So I'll leave it in your capable hands.
Uh, Lauren, everybody, thank you, uh, Jack Craw counselor.
Uh, you, I, look, I've, I've had a 40 year career
and biosecurity, it's been my whole life.
And I don't know of a weed that's worse than,
this is the worst primary production weed
that I've ever encountered because of its toxicity,
because of its pasture suppression.
And because, uh, existing chemical methods don't work
unless you really beef them up with a whole lot of residual,
um, uh, pesticides
that are really gonna knock your clover out.
And, and the fact that you have to keep repeat spraying.
So we're really, we're really stomped in terms of, uh,
broad, uh, brush approaches to controlling this weed.
So what we need is a national campaign.
Uh, we believe this's got a na,
it's got national, uh, import.
It's not just Northland because it's wind blowing.
And because it, no matter what we do, no matter
what legal steps we take,
we can't prevent this thing from spreading throughout
New Zealand because it'll be attached to hay.
It'll be in, it'll be in stock trucks, it'll be in,
um, uh, logging trucks.
It'll be in, you name it, uh, uh, mud on, on,
on cow's, hooves, that kind of thing.
So we need a national campaign.
Also, our climate modeling indicates it,
this thing will thrive all the way to South Canterbury.
If you have a look at the climax model stuff
that we've actually commissioned, um, around about, well,
about three quarters of New Zealand's, uh, arable
and pasture land is, is endangered.
So this is very, very serious.
Um, so we're looking for a national campaign of awareness,
and, and we are looking,
the legal tools are important as well.
We'd like, uh, uh, MPI to declare it as an unwanted organism
so that we can take other actions.
I don't think having control area notices it's going
to stop this thing in the long run.
But at least when, when a, when an organism has a status,
then we we're able to take, make other action, take actions.
But we're really looking at biological control research now.
We've spent a bit of time, money on it,
but weve believe that in order to win this thing,
we need a three-way, uh, funding split
between central government industry and regional councils.
Now, we, we met with Andrew Hogar a couple times on this,
and he's basically said it's a primary production issue.
We, we need the primary producers to come to the table.
We agree with that. Um, so we are looking at,
uh, we'd like to see a three waste bid of
around about $300,000 each from industry.
That's beef and lamb, um, uh, dairy, NZ feder farmers
and, and the border sector plus, uh, the government,
maybe 300 and 300.
We, we think we can put up from regional councils.
Now we can take that in installments.
We've got about a $250,000 kickoff to,
to investigate better buy control solutions.
And, um, so we're at, we'd like, we'd like,
we'd like your comment on that or
comment to anyone else. Thank you.
Well, thanks Jack, and thanks Jeff
and everyone else that has joined, joined online.
It's great to see you all. I, I think this is a real issue.
Um, I was fortunate enough to be with you, good people
and have seen this firsthand, so I'm cognizant of it.
I think the real issue we've got to grapple with is,
is the short and then the medium,
and then the long term control of this stuff.
Now, Jack, you talked about biologics
and what that would look like, biological controls, uh,
and I'm thinking of the formal ragul that we, well,
the current ragul we do deal with.
Um, where do you see that teasing out?
Because I think the short term, uh, problems
that we face and
or fixes are really what we need
to be discussing here today.
Long-term control is one thing,
but it's actually arresting it
before it gets completely outta control.
Now you talked about nods and things like that.
Is it a case of doing that or is it too expensive?
Um, how, how, how do we contain this
before it actually busts through the border?
I think I'd like turn over to our biosecurity manager,
Don McKenzie, to give us a, a, um, a, a suite of options for
trying to prevent the, uh, spread in the, in the short term.
Yeah. Mackenzie been a similar to Jack.
We've been in the business for about, uh, 35 years.
And honestly this pasture year, we is, um, something else
in terms of containment.
Look, I think we've got a chance, uh, on land
where we are not finding the plant yet,
but it is close to those infestation areas.
We need an ability to get out there
and search really, um, put a line in the sand where we're,
where we think
that the plant hasn't established fully on pasture
and make sure that those areas are contained.
All landowners are fully aware we've got a
chance of slowing it.
If people find this plant early on their lifestyle block
or on their farm, they can do something about it.
But that surveillance needs to be up kept.
We haven't got a clear idea of the extent
and distribution of this, this weed
that would help us greatly.
We are receiving reports from agricultural contractors,
from people in the land and so on about where it might be.
Sometimes it's confusing with another similar looking.
Um, but we need to get that pinned down
in terms of other practical solutions to control it.
I think there's probably, uh, an opportunity there for us
to, um, look at at what are the tools, uh,
research could, um, provide for us.
There might be some simple detection tools.
Goodness me, we've used dogs
to detect other really problem weeds in New Zealand.
That would be a useful tool to have on hand.
Now for a bit of border control at these areas,
we might need to use artificial intelligence
to actually find out
where these plants are appearing in pasture
that could be developed.
So it needs to be, those researchers need
to put their heads together on something
that's really gonna claim a good part of New Zealand
that would be useful.
We think also there's some useful things
to do in regulation.
We need some infringement, offense notices.
So our council with our rules
and our plan, when somebody has got this on their land
and we take, uh, action to remove that,
it would be very useful to have infringement fines
with our regional council offices so
that those neighbors don't, they're obliged to take action.
That would may mean a lot more in terms of behavior change.
So, uh, there's just a, just a few things in the mix there.
There's quite a package there. But,
Sorry, sorry Don, I don't, don I don't mean
to interrupt you and I do apologize,
so please accept my apologies.
I've got a series of questions coming,
so do you mind if we just go through those
because my committee members are, uh, very short on time.
So J Joe then,
Oh, morning everyone.
Lovely to see you all.
Uh, again, I have met most of you
before, I think when I came up for a visit to discuss
El Kapa with you.
Um, I just wanted to touch on something that you were,
you were already kind of skirting around the edges of the,
uh, Don with regards to control solutions.
So you met, so it was mentioned earlier, um, that you wanted
to be able to investigate control solutions
and you've briefly touched on a little bit of that,
but given that there's no, well, there's only some chemical
that does something to it,
but not a lot, what else might
that look like in the way of investigation?
Are you thinking about looking about what might be able
to come in from overseas potentially,
or what are your, what are your options there?
Well, we really think bio control is,
is very best option for to follow.
Do you want to add anything to that,
Jim? Yeah, I would
just say there's two, um, reports linked there
and what we sent through and one is, uh, one pulled together
by Ag research and that just outlines what we could do
to improve what we've got.
They looked pretty closely at what Ozzy has done and
after years of work there, there isn't great solutions.
They have three things we don't have,
but none of those plug a gap
that things we have here don't already do.
So they basically outlined, you could look at this
to improve the efficacy of what's been done.
Some of that work's already been at, um, farmlands
and New Farm have been testing things,
but it's still just early days
and it's all being done kind of on the shoestring.
And so really what we need is that partnership from us,
you know, central and sector to pick our priorities
and actually invest, you know, saying, right,
here's some control tools we could look at to improve.
Here's the buyer control pathway.
And yes, it's a long term thing,
but if you don't actually start now,
you are four years down the track.
Um, so you've got that path happening
that track some buy control
and then that awareness track
to buy those farmers some time.
That's really what you're doing is you can slow that spread
and prevent that impact from hitting earlier.
Mm-hmm. So those three pathways all need to be,
you know, running together.
Okay, thank you. Uh, Sue,
red Main then Steve Abel, then Miles,
I Good morning.
Hey, I was just straight into it.
I just got a couple of questions.
You talked about the, um, infringement notices
and that currently the ones
or the enforcement mechanisms are, are not,
or too slow and time consuming.
So I just wondered what you had in mind.
And then also there was something about,
you wrote about the good neighbor rule
that requires land occupies to destroy it, um,
within 50 meters of a neighboring property,
provided the neighbor is actively managing the weed.
But what if the neighbor doesn't have the weed?
Was that like Exactly. Managed. Oh, okay.
Um, and then I also wondered if you've got any,
if you are actually notifying farmers
among the line landowner, if you've got a means of doing
that to aware that, um, draw their attention to the issue
and how serious it is.
Yep, yep. Um, yep.
So yes, there, there has been awareness.
It's actually had, uh, uh, like a similar plant in the plan
for, for a good actually 10 years gravel ground.
So they look very similar.
And so the actions for gravel ground, so aren't
that different to Madagascar Redwater.
So had that rule in there.
We have, we've had very few boundary control kind of, um,
offenses to be fair.
Um, people aren't, uh, kind
of raising their hand about that.
But with more awareness, we expect more
and we will, you know, need
to do compliance when we do that.
Compliance when a, when a when a property owner says, right,
I'm controlling Madagascar rag on my side,
but my neighbor isn't, that's when we can take action.
The infringement fines would be very helpful
because the only option we've got is to go
through a lengthy process in the act, writing them out,
notices of direction and so on.
You know, telling them to control them.
If they don't, we take some action.
An infringement fine would give an instant sort of, um,
you know, uh, message that you can't do this, get on
with it, get $750
and if you don't do it this week, we'll be back next week.
So we haven't got that ability and,
and the bio act reform would give us that ability
to take action under that rule
and several others under our regional case management
plan. That would be very useful.
Thank you. I just quickly that that's great.
And that's kind of ambulance at the bottom
of the cliff stuff 'cause Jeff talked last week about, um,
imposing some things whereby the moving of hay or the,
or I don't know, the cleaning of trucks
before the logging trucks, before they move between regions.
Is there anything on that level that you're considering
as well, or that you'd like us to assist with? Good
Question.
Um, yeah, look, we don't think that actually, um,
we don't think that that that's a pragmatic, um,
solution stopping, um, machinery, stopping hay.
There are literally hundreds, perhaps thousands of diggers
of farm machinery going in
and out of, um, you know, uh,
title get up at the as we speak.
And honestly, I think
that this wind blowing seed is very, very fine.
It can be caught in cars, um, motorbikes.
Um, yes, it can be transported in hay,
but, um, the reality
of preventing hay moving from Northland,
that's our rural economy and a snap.
And I, I think that's not a p step.
Um, as I said, I think looking at, uh,
Steve the case,
Sorry, um, I just very quickly, uh,
Mike Barrick has a supplementary then I,
Just to stop on that in terms of what you said,
and you don't think that's an option yet, um, from
what I hear, and we heard from Pmu
that 35% reduction in production on your farm,
I would've thought that's pretty catastrophic
and I sure as hell don't want it down on
the wire wrapper on my farm.
So, um, I'm just a little bit concerned, you know,
I sit there and think about, you know, Sue said machinery
and feed and also livestock, you know, I look on cloud jars.
There's a whole lot of livestock in Northland
and that'll be getting dispersed for sale,
getting dispersed all round,
all round, uh, the north island.
And um, you know, I'm not sure that that's, um, that's,
that's that greater position to take.
Ah, well we can't do much about that.
And the odd sea might get blown onto car, so ah, well,
we'll just let it go, you know?
Did you wanna respond to that, Don, given I, I mean I, I,
I sympathize with your remarks to Ron,
because you are quite right.
We are talking about hundreds if not thousands
of vehicle heavy vehicles in some instances.
So can I stop, you wanna just wanna respond
to Mike Butter's, uh, remarks
and then I'll go to Steve Abel?
Well, we think a, a national campaign,
but a better awareness would be far better
because, uh, let's face it, this, um,
lead has already spread that will be in other areas now.
And what are landlords doing to keep an eye out for that,
to be more aware about it and detect it early.
Uh, we cannot stop this, uh, weed spreading.
And Julian, anything,
I think what we had said when we talked to industry was
that we wouldn't, um, you know, impose that lightly
is talking to the industry partners
and, you know, our central
government partners in the same way.
What pragmatically do you think could be
done that you would back?
Because if the industry itself doesn't back those
restrictions and doesn't believe in those restrictions,
then the likelihood of
that actually making any difference meaningfully
'cause your ability to enforce it is pretty limited.
Mm-hmm. It would send a message.
Um, but again, so we would want that to be
industry then say, Hey, yeah, actually
we believe that will help.
And then they would push that message
and, you know, come through that rural, um, you know,
the impact on the rural community, they would understand
that and believe in it and back it more meaningfully.
So it's, I think it's, it's there on the table for part of
that discussion with the industry.
Um, but again, it would be need to be nationally driven,
those controls because if it's just a Northland based
control, again, it's not brought into nationally.
Thank Thank you. Uh, Steve Abel.
Yeah. Uh, good to hear from you all.
Um, I sort of am of the same view as Mike, that
the, there seems to be different orders of priorities.
Surely the first greatest priority is
to minimize the spread, contain it as much as we can,
and not withstanding
that it's gonna be exceedingly difficult to do that
any degree to which we can, uh, minimize the spread
surely is beneficial.
And to your point saying, you know, we can't do this
'cause it's our rural economy.
Well that's exactly what we're trying to protect, right?
If the, if the harm that it's capable
of causing at 35% reduction in production is
what we're trying to stop from taking over other regions
of the country, then yes, that's exactly
what the point of it is.
Um, so first stop the spread.
Part of that surely is also assessing to
what extent it has already spread.
Uh, we had Grant McCollum suggesting a motive of his,
found it in the Hawke's Bay already.
Um, we need to have some overarching sense
of where it's gone to.
And part of that is informing people about how critically
damaging this weed is, um, how to identify it.
I did agree with the concept of calling it mad rag instead
of the Madagascar rag water
because people think of rag water is not as a, you know,
not the worst thing in the world.
Um, and, and then the development of the solutions,
the biologicals or whatever
that become long-term protections, that surely is a thing
that's gonna take more time than the critical first do no
harm, minimalist harm response.
That needs to be, you know, hit urgent. You know?
And in that regard, to your point about a proposition, uh,
jack of the three-way split of the budget for it,
it seems to me that that's a nice idea,
but $900,000 doesn't seem to be in the realm of
what we are talking about here.
If this is as bad as everyone is telling us it is,
including you guys, it seems
that we need a more substantive investment
and central government needs to carry the weight of that.
I would have thought. Um, great.
If everyone else is chipping primary,
primary sector should be chipping in as well.
But just if,
if we are seriously listening in your telling us
that this is as bad as it is, then uh,
a stitch in time is gonna save us everything rather than
Finding people. John,
do you have a, a comment?
I see you've got your hand up.
Yeah, yeah, thank you.
Um, you might realize we've got, um,
you know, we're doing the campaigns now.
I meet the candidates for the, uh, local elections.
I've been talking about this, uh, from, uh, Kiowa to,
uh, WGRE.
A lot of people actually don't know about Madagascar rag.
That really worries me as a farmer.
Uh, I certainly don't wanna weed,
I had cattle coming here last night
and, uh, I always quarantined them, make sure they've, um,
you know, drop off the Kai
and all these other things we've got up here.
Uh, I think Miles will also know that, you know,
getting money outta federated farmers would be pretty
well impossible for this event.
Yeah. And I think getting things out quickly from beef
and lamb is not a great option either with weeds.
The sooner you can hit them, the better, uh,
the better position you end.
And I think time is the essence right now,
and I think we need central government
to really put a stamp on this and do some quarantine.
I'm, I'm probably working, I I've had a bit of a problem
with my connection this morning, so I've missed a bit
of the, um, uh,
It's, it's, it's all, it's all good.
John. I think the, the what I think we've all on the same
page here where we agree
that a stitch in time does save nine, um,
a national campaign to everyone's point, I think is, um,
speaking personally anyway, the contention I think
that we've all got to grapple with
and then get over the line, um, perhaps with some
of our government, uh, officials and or members,
because this is clearly evident of as a growing problem.
I'm always interested, and I've asked this question to
of you before Jeff, um, it is how do we extrapolate out
what the costs are like now people say 30% are reduction in
on-farm pastoral, uh, production,
and by virtue there'll be a significant downturn in,
in in economic activity.
If we can put a number to that and, and,
and say to the regional economy, and I said this to you
before Jack as well, we see this being
inside the next three years, I don't know,
tease out a number three
or $400 million reduction in economic activity,
then officials, government departments,
ministers take this very seriously given the taxable
footprint that is now removed, uh,
from the coffers as it were.
So without being unnecessarily snide, I think
that's the way we have to view this.
Because if it's not a problem, it's not a problem,
oh well it's just a bloody weed, you'll deal with it.
But if the, the, the government coffers are gonna be short
three or $400 million
of tax takeover the next decade, that is a lot of money.
And there is a sell in that story.
Yep. Oh, sorry Mark.
We are putting a business plan together
through our sector leaders.
Uh, we, we've managed to scratch up 54 th uh, 54,000.
Right? What's the name? Martin. Martin. Martin Jenkins.
And putting that together for a business plan,
exactly what you've just said.
Yes. Okay. Lining all the costs.
You know, for example, you know, we we're talking 900,000.
It's nothing because Palmer have already spent $250,000 in
the last four years at strain to try contain this week.
That's just one farm.
That's just one farm. Gee, on top
of the 35% less production,
the cost will probably gone up 35 to 40%.
'cause this would be a roll, uh, spray operation
that they wouldn't have to do.
They could put that money into more fertilizer
and running the farm more profitably.
So on top of that, so it is, to sum it up, it's like
for us in Northland, we've gotta hold the line, you know,
we need some key statements like hold the line
awareness pro, uh, program.
Uh, if you haven't, if you haven't got it on your farm,
mark, you do not want it.
No, no, no, I agree. Agree.
Because you get three plants on your farm,
that's 30,000 seeds, right. And you've just
Plants all you flowers, all you, correct,
Yeah. One plant, 10,000
seeds.
So those are the sort of understandings of the seriousness
of this weed that we have to have.
Now, just
Very, just very quickly, Jeff, just very quickly, Jeff,
is there any way that when you get that business case,
you can get that sort of a, a generic to this committee?
Because I think, uh, there's power in the voice
of this collective here
and we're all pretty collegial, so
this is not a political issue.
We'll, we, we'll certainly take it back
to our respective caucuses and try
and get the kind of outcome that you are chasing.
I believe we can do that. Yeah. Get that, those
Get back to the clerk of the committee when it's resolved.
That would be great. You
Gotta date on that.
Uh, not express.
Well, just as when is, is this available, Jack?
Don't, don't, you know, don't language,
Short order. Look,
just apologies that 900,000 was
for supply control research, not the,
not the entire national program.
Oh, okay. Thank you.
Very good. Any further? Quick miles.
Yeah, look, I don't wanna lay the point,
but, um, don't you think, uh, in conjunction with
what you are suggesting, that notices
of direction would be very useful so
that feed couldn't come off those properties?
Very good, man. There's lots of lifestyles with horses
that will go all around the bales, the, the north island,
and some of them come down south with a ba of two
of hay in the back of their float.
And, um, all that sort of stuff, you know, and,
and the spread of this weed, um,
is obviously a major concern for not only within Northland,
but around the country.
So don't you think to, you know, feed as, you know,
machinery, animals, all those things, if, if,
if there's an out, uh, uh, property has, uh, a population
of these, um, plants, don't you think the ability
to give a notice of direction
so they can't take stuff off there without
cleaning down the machinery, without proving that they're,
you know, just to stop.
Joe's gonna, good question.
So I think that, you know,
we wouldn't be doing it on a property by property basis.
You know, we don't have the, the regulation structures for
that, but what we are talking about is drawing a line
after a certain, a certain area of Northland
and saying anything from within the site.
So that's that controlled area notice thing again.
So it's a big, it's a big deal
and it would just need to be brought into my industry
because actually enforce it.
It's tricky. So it has to be, it's more a signaling thing.
Um, it has a big impact on those people.
Um, but it sends a strong message.
Um, but industry would have to say, yes,
we want this, let's do it.
We back it and we are gonna push that message.
One, one final question.
Uh, well, a couple of final questions
and then we've gotta wrap up.
Sorry, team. Um, Steve Abel. So who
Has the jurisdiction to do that controlled area notice?
Can you guys do that now? Security? You need biosecurity.
We have to do it through, um, with MPI and see.
Yep. All the questions team.
Oh, I just, one, one
of the things you cited was the national awareness campaign,
and I just wondered how, what that looks like.
I, because I think there are a lot
of people that aren't aware of it.
Yeah, it, it's, it's, you know, incredible
that kind of breakthrough.
Um, you know, we've got messages all over Northland
and there's still a whole lot of people who are
like, what are you talking about?
Um, so that messaging consistent national escalated
so that when it's a national message,
and we talked about it, that, you know,
in the previous hearing you guys are talking about
where the messages are consistent.
The, the threat is consistently, um, pushed
and it goes through all different channels
and it's targeted to the channels that the actual, um,
the farmers and the people we need to reach,
actually care about and hear from.
So I think, um, it would look at, it would have a whole lot
of different forms, but it's that, you know, be aware,
be vigilant, act early, those, those are those key messages.
Don't bring it onto your farm. These are the pathways,
you know, and this is how you idea it.
Oh, just, sorry, very quickly. So, because one thing,
'cause if you were on, you know, if you were on the country
and getting feds to spread the word and what have you
and how it spread, then without actually having
to enforce restrictions on hay moving
and stock moving, it would at least give people the option
to consider actually, is this be, you know,
should I be buying not by buying hay from Northland
or should I, yeah.
So it would give people the option.
Well make it a consideration in the decision making.
Yeah. Yeah. Good question.
No matter what else we do, we have to do that.
Yeah, absolutely. Have to do that.
As Jeff said, a national awareness campaign
is absolutely vital.
We cannot do anything about it. Yeah.
So rural media, stockyards, television, you name it.
I mean, the rural, uh, media rich pretty good.
So I would probably start there,
but we'll have experts on that.
But that has to be national. That can't just be Northland.
Yeah. I, I totally agree. Thank you.
Brilliant. Everyone, thank you so much for your,
uh, valuable time this morning.
We're very grateful for your time.
Um, we'll leave you your day. Have a great day.
We also grateful. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks again. Thank you. Thank you.